Dialectics of Nature
The Epistemological Power of the Logic of Change

“Life is the drive to persist, to oppose the general entropy of the universe.”
-The teal lion


The physical world is impermanent and, at the margins, uncertain. 

At the very beginning, the Singularity was no longer. It negated itself the moment the microwave background radiation signaled the unfolding of space-time.

Our universe is a process-centered reality with a past, a present, and a future at any given moment. The past is accounting, the present is certain, and the future is probable, from almost certain to randomness. Change is the dynamics interplay of opposite probabilities defining a given reality.

Reality has agency on the present where competing probable outcomes framed by their physical or biological constrains can either remain the same, change quantitatively, or evolve a new reality, a change in quality.

Organized matter became a reality when the strong nuclear force glued together positrons, quarks, and neutrons to usher in atomic nuclei as the universe cool a bit after its formation. Once positive charged nuclei were present, electromagnetic forces pulled negative charged electrons to their orbits to attain electromagnetic equilibrium, that is, charge neutrality. Hydrogen, the first atomic element, was born.

Clauds of hydrogen atoms quickly formed and filled the primal world. These massive formations grew ever larger, reaching a tipping point and collapsing under their own gravitational pull to give rise to the first generation of stars.

The newly formed stars began their celestial life cycle by turning on their nuclear fusion engines. Hydrogen atoms, their atomic fuel, were smashed into Helium, emitting as a byproduct energy in the form of photons. Millions of suns sprang up. The universe’s lights were now on.

The first generation of stars matured and burned their hydrogen fuel until it was exhausted. In the throes of death, they created in a flurry and dispersed onto the universe, sometimes violently, the remaining natural elements of the periodic table.

Star dust negated itself an became organized matter, an emergent physical reality.

In the stellar cauldron, the strong nuclear force controls all nuclear fusion processes and its corresponding energy emissions; on the other hand, the weak nuclear force uses radioactive nuclear decay to bring into natural equilibrium unusually unstable heavy nuclei.

Furthermore, the electromagnetic force keeps elements on a charge neutral steady state; and its valence algorithm control the combining power of all elements through chemical bond formation. Lastly, the gravitational force tells matter how to move once matter has curved space-time.

These four natural forces, once established, are the grids that support the movement of matter and energy in the universe, its laws of motion.

Physics set; the universe transitioned to chemistry.

Elements combined through chemical bonding in order to attain valence neutrality giving birth to chemical compounds, an emergent new reality. Thus, oxygen and hydrogen, when bonded, ushered in the water molecule (H2O) with its emergent wetness quality, a precursor of life. Similarly, carbon when bonded with hydrogen ushered in the methane molecule (CH4), and when bonded with oxygen the carbon dioxide one (CO2).

Carbon abundance and bonding capabilities made it a precursor of life on Earth. A high valence chemical element, carbon had the ability to make single, double, and triple bonds. Furthermore, carbon could string together long, complex, highly stable compounds able to store and process information. Bonding complexity is path determined (bonding choices) and cumulative in time. Bonding complexity has grown from a handful of pairings, as is the case of the water molecule, to sixty bonding pairings and up, as is the case of highly complex proteins.

Uranium was also an abundant element during the formation of our planet. These heavy elements are prone to radioactive nuclear decay (nuclear fission), a source of highly concentrated energy. This energy, when combined with water, ushered in primeval geysers. The energy output of such radioactive geysers propelled the chemistry of life into existence.

Chemistry transition to biology.

Life is the drive to persist, to oppose the general entropy of the universe.

Cells are the foundation of all living organisms. They are made up of long, complex information driven organic compounds organized inside a tangible material boundary that keeps out the external world. Cells regularly update an evergreen model of the local environment through feedback channels. 

Cells as living organism have agency; they are autonomous complex systems organized to process energy efficiently in order to sustain themselves. 

Adaptation is pathway determined; it entails choosing successful changes. The natural art of choosing has three components: pattern recognition, judgements, and decision making. This natural process is embedded in all living organisms as an innate quality of its agency, that is, of its biological intelligence.

Movement is a goal oriented spatial displacement designed to reposition the living entity onto a more advantageous setting. Behavior is a pattern of movements executed as an innate response to recurrent local environmental conditions. 

Evolution packs causal potential into life. The cycle of life is fleeting, a continuous movement of being and becoming, a perennial affirmation, and negation of reality.

Single cells with no internal specialization (prokaryotic) provided the original cellular blueprint. Prokaryotic bacteria pioneered both the use of enzymes (proteins that speed up chemical reactions) and that of sunlight (photosynthesis) in order to feed itself. These primal cells evolved mitochondria and latter on semi-specialized organelles to enhance energy throughput processing (eukaryotic). 

Mitochondria is a bacteria induced adaptation, a symbiotic partnership (horizontal gene transfer) deployed to enhance an eukaryotic cell’s ability to tackle an ecological niche. Chloroplast, the organelle that contains the photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll in plants cells, is also a bacteria induced genetic entanglement. Eukaryotic cells evolved into multicellular organisms with the same genome (fungi, algae).

Plants use chlorophyll and sunlight to photosynthesize glucose and oxygen out of water and carbon dioxide. A symbiotic relationship between fungi and seaweed (algae) made possible the proliferation of plant species on land, a precursor of animal life on the Earth surface. 

Fungi release enzymes to break down and absorb soil minerals such as phosphorus that it can exchange for host plants’ organic carbon compounds. Fungi have developed vast roots entanglements (wood wide network) able to transport carbon, minerals and water from areas of abundance to those of scarcity. Fungi have also synthesized powerful mind-altering biochemical substances to gain control of host insects. Fungi can feed, kill, or hallucinate us.

Multicellular organism with the same genome further promoted the division of labor and evolved highly specialized functions (tissues, neurons, organs). Life scaled up its structure giving rise to more complex organism that required ever greater efficiency, organization, and control (sexual reproduction, senses, neurons, backbone, brain). These quantitative transformations led to a new quality; sentient life.

The cataclysmic disappearance of the big reptilians, a random event, opened the evolutionary door to the warm-blooded mammalians. An explosion of new life replenished the planet’s former animal exuberance.
Climatic changes caused the African jungle to recede and the savanna to expand, enticing an evolutionary line of the big apes to descend from the trees, walk upright, and free their hands. The journey of the free hand to do ever more sophisticated work was the evolutionary roadmap followed by the developing human brain. 

Caloric budgeting (calories in/out balance sheet) and body homeostasis regulation take a big chunk of our brain’s capacity just to keep us alive and functioning. 

A genetic mutation10 million years ago gave us the ability to digest certain alcohols. This mutation opened up a whole new caloric reservoir since now we were able to eat the fermented fruit fallen from the trees and scattered on the African savanna, thus enhancing our survival prospects.

In the meantime, female ovulation cycles became fully detached from the mammalians’ sexual heat drive, giving human sexuality agency. Eve’s erotic fantasies gave her both sexual autonomy and a virtual, abstract reality. She was now self-aware. 

The universe is dull and silent, colored a cosmic latte. Sounds and colors are a construe of our senses and of our brain on the basis of differences in air pressure or sunlight wave frequency, respectively. They exist as such only in our virtual reality. The universe’s beauty is our abstraction.

Chemical bonds have a symbiotic relationship with the brain through the senses of smell and taste. Sensory cells located in the nose are able to identify chemical bonds and transmit that information to the olfactory centers of the brain where they are classified as odors. 

Our sense of taste was always biased in favor of those local flavors that packed the most calories, such as glucose and fats. Tasting is to food what music is to sound, and writing is to language, a learned skill.

Emotions, on the other hand, are culture specific conceptual mappings of defined behaviors; a learned construe use as a short hand for human mood communication. 

Beauty is meant to be consumed and appreciated vicariously, that is, in the mind that contemplates it. This dependence on the other’s conceptual reality in opposition to our own makes abstract beauty a critical marker in the transformation of homo to sapiens and the dawn of culture.

Acknowledging the other’s existential reality opened the doors to our group consciousness and to our humanity, thus changing the trajectory of our species’ evolution from genetics to culture. 

This qualitative change in our evolutionary timescale set us in a path of ever more control of nature. Tool’s development requires purpose, purpose requires anticipating a future use, and a future tense requires abstract reasoning.

As free agents, humans are able to modify nature’s own constrains through the application of technological tools, enhancing the degrees of freedom available to them at any given time. 

Biology transitioned to culture.

EPILOGUE
An existential crossroad

“We are everything the universe is not, aware; the universe is everything we are not, timeless.” 
-The teal lion
Are we at an existential crossroad? 
Yes. Our species will perish if we commit ecological suicide either by action or by omission. There is not planet B. 
Can you elaborate?
Yes. We might perish in a nuclear Armageddon. We are still not out of the woods; the probabilities of a self-inflicted apocalypse are still high. 
In addition, we remain oblivious to the fact that the current trajectory of global warming points to a catastrophic denouement; a Venus-type runaway greenhouse effect maelstrom. 
What are we to do?
Right now, we must push hard to develop technological options to quickly reduce the current level of carbon in the atmosphere and that of future carbon emissions produced as a result of human activities. Achieving a stable atmospheric equilibrium will require a steady flow of public funding over the coming years in order to provide the space necessary to achieve interplanetary mobility. 
How do we attain escape velocity?
We must shatter our existential insecurities and wean ourselves of our solar dependency.
Wean ourself of our solar dependency, how? 
Exercising control of nuclear fusion will give us an avenue to exit our solar dependent cocoon. 
Really? 
Yes. Remember how cowed humanity was before gaining control of fire? Well, that’s how we are now, afraid to challenge the cosmos.
Our solar cocoon was a vital one but one we have outlived. Control of nuclear fusion will end our solar dependency, a new reality. 
A transformative technological leap that will provide us a real chance of escaping our birth planet and attain interplanetary, and with time, interstellar mobility. A survival feat beyond the divine. 	
Is the universe timeless?
	We are everything the universe is not, aware. The universe is everything we are not, timeless. Timelessness is relative. For a female Mayfly whose lifespan is five minutes, ours is timeless, thus for us so is the universe. Our universe is young, teeming with energy and full of vitality, nevertheless, everything that has a beginning must have an end. 	
Order requires energy; thus, as long as the universe is expanding orderly complex systems will populate it. Once the energy of the big bang is spent, entropy, the natural tendency to greater disorder will prevail and the universe, as we know it, will cease to exist. At the very end, it will be full of motionless elementary particles, pitch black, soundless, and cold, just like a colossal sarcophagus.
So, that’s it?
Well, it depends…
It depends on what?
On the total amount of matter. Repulsion forces produced the big bang and the current expansion we are in, attraction (gravitational) forces will do the opposite if enough matter is present in the end to reach a tipping point and initiate a universal contraction, a big crunch. 
I see. Never a dull moment.  

IE González, Tampa, August 27th, 2023
New expanded edition of the original text.

